# brest-pg
PostgreSQL library for Brest

## 1. Usage

### 1.1 Setup

Setup via npm

`npm install brest-pg`

In Brest project settings.js file, add postgres key:

```
    postgres: {
        host: 'localhost',
        port: 5432,
        db: 'foobar',
        user: 'foobar_admin',
        password: 'SevenAsterisks123'
    },
```

### 1.2 Initialize as Brest module

```javascript
	const BrestPG = require('brest-pg');
	//...
	brest.use([BrestPG]);
```

### 1.3 Link tables

BrestPG automatically keeps track of database tables, creating
table objects and controllers for each table in the database.

### 2 Filters

### 2.1 Introduction

Brest-pg is developed to work with Brest request filters, and provides a large amount of automatically
generated filters, as well as tools for creating user-defined filtering.

```javascript
	function cherchez_la_femme(callback) {
		User.list({gender: 'f'}, callback);
	}
```

While the primary goal of filters is to narrow down the request, it can also expand it, by using "join" override.

Please note, that while expanding basic requests with filters should suffice most of the needs, it is not an
ultimate tool and it is highly recommended to implement custom SQL queries, when request is complex or specific.

You can expand custom request by the use of filter templating as well.

Filters are passed as key/value object into the respective table methods. Filters can be combined, but no additional
sanity check is made, so some filter combination may lead to unusual, unpredictable, faulty or malicious results.

```javascript
	function find_knights(callback) {
		Character.list({has_shining_armour: true, has_white_horse: true}, callback);
	}
```

### 2.2 Automatically generated filters

Each table is initialized with autofilters for each column:

- **"%column%"**: select rows with %column% equal to filter value

Example:
```javascript
	function cherchez_la_femme(callback) {
		User.list({gender: 'f'}, callback);
	}
```

- **"%column%s"**: select rows with %column% values belong to provided array
Example:
```javascript
	//Column is "manufacturer"
	function find_german_cars(callback) {
		Car.list({manufacturers: ['audi', 'bmw', 'mersedes', 'opel', 'porsche', 'volkswagen']}, callback);
	}
```

- **"not_%column%"**: select rows with column not equal to filter value
```javascript
	//Column is "skirt_color"
	function find_survivors(callback) {
		Crew.list({not_skirt_color: 'red'}, callback);
	}
```
- **"not_%column%s"**: select rows with %column% values not beloning to provided array
```javascript
	//Column is "color"
	function not_in_rainbow(callback){
		Paint.list({not_colors: ['red','orange','yellow','green','blue','indigo','violet']}, callback);
	}
```

- **"null_%column%s"**: select rows with not NULL %column% value
```javascript
	//Column is "hair_color"
	function find_hairless(callback) {
		User.list({null_hair_color: true}, callback);
	}
```

Please, note, that null-comparison filters are generated only for nullable fields

-**"%column%_gt"**: select rows with column value greater than filter value
```javascript
	//Column is "height"
	function higher_than_eiffel_tower(callback) {
		Building.list({height_gt: 324}, callback);
	}
```

- **"%column%_lt"**, **"%column%_gte"**, **"%column%_lte"**: same as previous, for "less than", "greater or equal" and "less or equat" comparisons.

Please, note that comparison filters are generated only for numeric fields

 - **limit**: limit search result. Limit filter accepts an array [limit, offset = 0],
 with optional second element. It behaves exactly as Postgres LIMIT/OFFSET

 - **order**: sort the result by provided column name

 ### 2.3 Custom filters

  Custom filters can be defined in custom classes constructors.
```javascript
	class User extends Table {
		constructor(db) {
			super(db, 'user', 'u');
			//...
			this.filters = {
				organisation_id: {
					description: `Select users from specific organisation`,
					join: ` LEFT JOIN user_organisation AS ut ON ut.user_id = u.id`,
					where: ` AND ut.organisation_id = %L`
				}
			};
    	}
    }
```

Each filter is described in filters object by it's name (organisation_id in example above) and it's fields.

"description" field is used for automaticall passing filters into API. The rest of the fields are request injections.
Technically, any string contained in double curly parentheses is considered an injection template,
but only the following are actually used in defailt queries:

- {{select}}
- {{join}}
- {{where}}
- {{group}}
- {{having}}
- {{order}}
- {{limit}}

For your custom queries you can use any injection templates you like.
If no injection is found in filters, they are ignored

### Filter folding

While default filter behaviour is desinged to communicate with Rest API generated by Brest, it might be sometimes
 invonvenient to use it for compex filtering inside of the project.

 There's an alternative way to combine filters,
 called "folding": when you apply several filters to one column, you can pass them in a single object, with column name as a key,
 instead of multiple entries.

 ```javascript
 	function height_between(from, to, callback) {
 		User.list({height: {
 			gte: from,
 			lte: to
 		}}, callback);
 	}
 ```

which is equal to

```javascript
 	function height_between(from, to, callback) {
 		User.list({height_gte: from,
 				   height_lte: to}, callback);
 	}
 ```

You can use the following folding keys:

            'eq': '%s',
            'neq': 'not_%s',
            'in': '%ss',
            'nin': '%ss',
            'null': 'null_%s',
            'nnull': 'not_null_%s',
            'gt': '%s_gt',
            'gte': '%s_gte',
            'lt': '%s_lt',
            'lte': '%s_lte'

## 3 Misc
### 3.1 Request Cheatsheet

- %% outputs a literal % character.
- %I outputs an escaped SQL identifier. (e.g. table name)
- %L outputs an escaped SQL literal. (value)
- %s outputs a simple string.

### 3.2 Persistent constants

- PERSISTENT_MODE_SIMPLE: The rows are stored as an array of objects. Keys are the array indices.
- PERSISTENT_MODE_ASSOC: The rows are stored as an object {[collect_by]: {row}}. Duplicate values are overwritten
- PERSISTENT_MODE_ARRAY_BUNDLE: The rows are bundled into arrays.
- PERSISTENT_MODE_ARRAY_KEY: The values of [collect_from] rows are stored in array bundles

## 4 Changelist

### 0.0.9

- Numeric columns now have comparison autofilters %column%_gt, %column%_gte, %column%_lt, %column%_lte
- Implemented filter folding
- "null_%column%", "not_null_%column%" autofilters are now generated only for nullable columns

### 0.0.8

- Fixed "limit" injection to comply with PostgreSQL syntax
- Default filters are now always generated as objects
- "limit" and "order" filters are now injected into Brest as objects

### 0.0.7

- Persistent functionality is seriously reworked
- "Not found" reply for row request now contain ids and filters
- "Not found" reply is less DB-specific, as it can be thrown directly back to API user
- Filters objects for Controller::exists and Table::exists are requred to contain data
- Custom filters can be passed into row() first param alongside column names. If custom filter is associated
with column name it still has to be passed as a second parameter.
- Added "limit" and "order" autofilters
- Fixed issue with "null_" and "not_null_" auto filters rendering incorrect query
- Fixed issue with update, broken by preprocessing call
- Fixed issue with JOIN in SELECT causing incorrect ids

### 0.0.6-1

- Fixed bug with empty Transform middleware

### 0.0.6

- Default "exists" Controller method callback now returns homogeneous reply: {exists: true|false, ...(filter fields)}

### 0.0.5
- Fixed issue with count & exists methods not working
- Added default crud options to Table
- Added Transform middleware to Table

### 0.0.2
- BrestPG.tbl(table_name) now returns Table instances for given tables
- Fixed issue with injecting filters
- Fixed issue with row request  building incorrect query when receiving
 an object as parameter

### 0.0.1
- First working version
